---
layout: post
title: What SQL speaking objects keep silence about
description: A crucial idea, without which SQL speaking objects are just a parody on Active Records
date: 2020-02-25T00:00:00+03:00
---

[SQL-speaking objects](https://www.yegor256.com/2014/12/01/orm-offensive-anti-pattern.html#sql-speaking-objects) concept was introduced by Yegor Bugayenko in his blog. He proposed it as more maintainable alternative for working with relational databases, compared to ORMs. From that time, it became one of the most argued concept in Elegant Objects. Some of the sceptics blamed SQL speaking objects for verbosity and boilerplate, bringing back SQL and suboptimal examples from the post, others constantly keep drawing analogies between SQL speaking objects and [Active Record](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern) pattern.

[A speech on SQL speaking objects](http://2016.jpoint.ru/talks/bugayenko/) was the first time I heard about Elegant Objects. Back in the days, I already felt regret for the most ORMs I faced in Java ecosystem, but the speech about such cardinal ORM replacement haven't convinced me at all. It took me a year to look at SQL speaking objects from a different angle, and from my experience I can tell that the topic is not revealed enough by the original blogpost and speech.

So, lets dig deeper.

## What is the key difference between SQL speaking objects and Active Record?

To finally answer this question, lets bring the definition of Active Records:

> An object that wraps a row in a database table or view, encapsulates the database access, and adds domain logic on that data.
>
> [www.martinfowler.com](https://www.martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/activeRecord.html)

Take a close look, how much the root "data" is met there. The pattern is deeply data-centric. There can be different [opinions](https://www.yegor256.com/2016/07/26/active-record.html) on that matter, but personally, I don't yet claim it wrong. As I stated in my previous posts, there should be a strict line between data and objects --- [what is virtue for code, is flaw for data, and vice versa](010_objects_and_data.html#objects-vs-data). Actve Record, as a part of the data world, is designed to expose the data:

```java
PostAR post = new PostAR();
post.title = "What SQL speaking objects keep silence about";
post.date = new Date();
post.save();
```

Assuming that there is a table `posts` with columns `name` and `date`, the code above will just create a new record in it. Simple as it sounds. Staying standalone, Active Record won't cause you any troubles. But the troubles will come later, when you couple other components to it:


```java
public class RSSFeed {
    private final Path path;
    private final List<PostAR> posts;

    public RSSFeed(Path path, List<Post> posts) {
        this.path = path;
        this.posts = posts;
    }

    public final void generate() {
        // Document below is generated by means of dom4j.
        Document document = new DOMDocument();
        DOMElement root = new DOMElement("rdf");
        DOMElement channel = new DOMElement("channel");
        for(Post post : posts) {
            DOMElement item = new DOMElement("item");
            DOMElement title = new DOMElement("title");
            title.setText(post.title);
            DOMElement date = new DOMElement("date");
            date.setText(post.date.toString());
            item.add(title);
            item.add(date);
            channel.add(item);
        }
        root.add(channel);
        document.add(root);
        try(Writer writer = new FileWriter(path.toFile())) {
            document.write(writer);
        } catch(IOException ex) {
            throw new RuntimeException(ex);
        }
    }
}
```

`RSSFeed` is tightly coupled to the `PostAR` Active Record class. At the same time, all it needs is title and date. It doesn't need the whole `PostAR` with method `save()` --- the coupling is obviously exhaustive here. Moreover, `Post`, as a member of data world, will inevitably be changing together with `posts` table, causing `RSSFeed` to be broken. Coupling on data model directly is always a risk.

## What's the role of SQL speaking objects here?

Speaking back to SQL speaking objects. If we look to example of such objects from the post, it may seem like they are no different from Active Records, DTOs, JPA entities or other data-centric artifacts:

```java
final class PgPost implements Post {
  private final Source dbase;
  private final int number;
  public PgPost(DataSource data, int id) {
    this.dbase = data;
    this.number = id;
  }
  public Date date() {
    return new JdbcSession(this.dbase)
      .sql("SELECT date FROM post WHERE id = ?")
      .set(this.number)
      .select(new SingleOutcome<Utc>(Utc.class));
  }
  public String title() {
    return new JdbcSession(this.dbase)
      .sql("SELECT title FROM post WHERE id = ?")
      .set(this.number)
      .select(new SingleOutcome<String>(String.class));
  }
}
```

Looking to it, you will probably implicitly imagine some table named `posts`, with `date` and `title` columns there, by looking at the public API of `PgPost` and assuming that it repeats the table structure like Active Record. And that's what the original blogpost doesn't reveal, that's where the main mislead come from: actually, the table and it's contents are *secondary* thing here. The primary thing is the `Post` interface:

```java
interface Post {
  Date date();
  String title();
}
```

`Post` is abstraction here. As each abstraction, `Post` is (supposed to be) declared [with client and business purpose in mind](014_traits_of_high_quality_abstractions.html#trait-4-there-should-be-particular-client-with-some-demand-behind-each-interface). Original text doesn't reveal the purpose of the `Post` existence, and it's a problem. Because the purpose is crucial here!

Lets make up some hypothetical purpose behind the `Post` existence. `RSSFeed`, mentioned in the previos section of this post, could be a nice candidate for such purpose.

```java
class RSSFeed {
    private final List<Post> posts;

    public RSSFeed(List<Post> posts) {
        this.post = post;
    }

    public final void generate() {
        // Document below is generated by means of dom4j.
        Document document = new DOMDocument();
        DOMElement root = new DOMElement("rdf");
        DOMElement channel = new DOMElement("channel");
        for(Post post : posts) {
            DOMElement item = new DOMElement("item");
            DOMElement title = new DOMElement("title");
            title.setText(post.title());
            DOMElement date = new DOMElement("date");
            date.setText(post.date().toString());
            item.add(title);
            item.add(date);
            channel.add(item);
        }
        root.add(channel);
        document.add(root);
        try(Writer writer = new FileWriter(path.toFile())) {
            document.write(writer);
        } catch(IOException ex) {
            throw new RuntimeException(ex);
        }
    }
}
```

The code above is almost the same as the option with Active Record, but now, `RSSFeed` is bound to only the stuff it requires. The post, with the title and date.

Notice: `RSSFeed` doesn't know anything about the database now. It doesn't matter for `RSSFeed` from where those posts were coming from: the `Post` instances might be fixed, from file, from database or from some side microservice, unlike `PostAR`, which is bound to row from table by definition. `PgPost` in such context is just [one of the infinite](014_traits_of_high_quality_abstractions.html#trait-2-truly-good-interface-has-infinite-number-of-potentially-useful-implementations) possible implementations for `Post`. As much there are implementations for the `Post` interface, as many reuse options there are for `RSSFeed` class. For `RSSFeed` coupled to `PostAR`, this trick just won't work.

That makes difference.

## Why do we even need that name --- "SQL speaking objects"?

To think more of it, there is actually nothing special about SQL speking objects. They are just objects, few from many. They have the same nature as any other objects: they implement some abstraction, which is supposed to be stable, and they have some dependencies, which are supposed to be loose. [Period](013_mental_maintainability_model.html). Does the fact that implementation of these objects executes SQL queries makes them somewhat different? I don't think so.

"SQL speaking objects" name is just a name of a pattern, but there is one common problem with any sort of patterns: the more you think of them instead of the business domain, the more deep and severe mistakes you are risking to make in your design. So, it's meaningless to draw the analogies between SQL speaking objects, Active Records, JPA entities or other ways of mapping queries results to data structures. It is much less interesting then the quality of abstractions they serve.

